Okay, I'd like to start with the latest series you finished, The Demon Princes.
It amazed me that you could expand the theme, what seems to be a slight theme,
into five beautiful novels. Do you remember what began the first book, The Star
King? Well, my theory on this, you'll have to forgive me if I kind of ramble a
little bit on it, because I haven't really put into words too much. But in
general, I think when you're plotting something in this order, you don't want to
get too involved. Just take some rather simple idea, which is susceptible of a
lot of variation, you see. If I started something that was a real complicated
idea and then tried to make five books about it, I'd be catching my feet all the
time. So I'm getting an idea which is essentially rather simple, and then
diversifying as I go along. Well, it simplifies it for me. Now, I don't think
that's anything particularly so big of a complication there. Anybody can figure
it out for themselves.
So, naturally when I started, I had no idea how it was going to turn out. In
other words, in fact, I don't believe I've, as I went along from story to story,
that I even considered these, well, I had, yes, I had to do that a little bit,
come to think of it, because if anybody's read these books, you'll notice that
in the, oh, these epigraphs of the story, I have people kind of discussing the
whole five of these so-called people's princes and characterizing them. But
essentially, I really didn't have much notion about one villain from story to
story. I kind of had to work it up as I went along. Period. Did you intend for
there to be five books when you started? Oh, yeah. Sure. I got the first one
through going, and then through, oh, some problems in the publication. I got
diverted, and didn't get back to doing the final two for, oh, some series of
times. Did I, I'm not sure if anybody else saw this, or if I misread it, but I
could swear there was an inconsistency. In the Star King, you say that the demon
princes were aliens, and by the time I get to the palace of love, they're
humans. No, the, the,
this particular breed of individual that was, the Star King was a member of, was
an alien. He was, I really forget to tell you the truth. In fact, I had some
notion that I was going to do some more work and develop this idea a little bit
more. No, this is an idea. This was a, a, a sort of a creature that, that had
the ability to mimic or, or, or, uh, what's the word? Simulate human beings. And
it was alien. But the rest of them were not. Just this particular one book
there. One. In fact, I think if I were doing it over again, I'd change all that.
I wouldn't have the aim of the God to eliminate that over. But it's not
necessary to the, to the, to the part of the book really. And it just kind of
distracts. That's the hindsight. In other words, it doesn't, uh, it doesn't
augment the series at all, I think, to have that personal understanding. You
agree or not? No, I agree with you, yeah. Um, it doesn't make any difference.
They could have all been human. Yeah. I think it would have been more consistent
to have it. But then, when you're starting a series, you see, you're just, uh,
uh, reaching here, roping there, trying this, trying that, seeing how it works.
Then after you kind of get a rhythm going, that's just, that's how you do the,
the rest of it. I felt some sympathy for the demon princes. They, uh, they're
very, very creative individuals. They have... They have a very bad character
yourself. Well... Do you have any... Do you, uh, go to church and all that? No.
Well, what I mean is this. They, uh, they have enormous talents. They're very
creative. They, some of them were mistreated as children, uh, and they've made
it with great success in a, in a large universe. And they don't grovel when Kurt
Gerson ends their lives. The, uh, the, the, the, the, the one of the groups that
most fits what you're saying is the last one, the book number five. Uh, number,
the villain of the number three book, uh, he, uh, was, uh, was, uh, badly
treated as a child perhaps, but, uh, I think members one, two, and four, these
really were, uh, developed themselves into what the ultimate community came.
But, and I never felt any particular sympathy for any of us, you know, as, uh,
liking except that's a little bit for, uh, number five. What a number five. Why
does Gerson say in that last book, I think it was the last page of the book of
dreams, uh, Alice tells him to throw the book of dreams out into space and he
says, I can't do that. Why would he have any sympathy or why would he have any
response to that book such that he couldn't get rid of it? Uh, well, I think
everybody will have to answer that for themselves. Okay. Uh, Kurt Gerson
himself, in some ways he's as monomaniacal as the demon princes. You know, the
whole purpose of his life is revenge. That is, uh, essential to the, otherwise
that's the gasoline which links the cargo. Right? Right. Okay. You need that to
pay more? No. If he, if he was kind of ho-hum about the old thing, then there
wouldn't be any story. It wouldn't be serious. In other words, if he wasn't, if
he wasn't upset, then he might get bored, you see? In other words, in order to,
uh, for instance, if Napoleon didn't like the idea of conquering the world, he
might have just been, farmed grapes and corsica. In order to make the stories
function, you have to have a person with a certain set of attributes. Correct?
Yes, sir. Yes. Okay. Do you admire him? Uh, well, that's, uh, I'm
just trying to characterize the question by saying that I prefer to, um,
from, uh,
getting involved with, uh, what I'm, what I'm trying to say is I prefer to be
like a director at a, at a, producing a, working a movie than to get myself
involved in my character. I want to stay away from him. I didn't answer your
question. That's good enough. Yeah. Okay. Uh, let me move on just to another
topic here. The, um, obviously you're, you're noted as a stylist, your
distinctive method of writing. Yeah, that's, uh, well, I'll go on, ask your
question. Well, I was just going to say I'm kind of interested in the, uh, the
evolution of your style because when you began... This is what irritates me. I
don't have any style. All I do is try to write whatever in the best possible
way. Now, if, uh, you take the trouble to read, uh, some of my murder mysteries,
you'll find that they're, they're written in a different way. Every, everything
you write, everything I write, everything anybody writes, the style, or the way
the words are put together is part of the mood of the story. It, uh, it is part
of the story itself. It's part of the complete, completed product. Now, when you
say I, uh, that, why did I, how did I evolve this? That, that implies that I
have one style that I use for everything from, uh, this, uh, early dying earth
thing up to, uh, one of, well, this mystery story, uh, with locale in the
countryside out here called Fox Valley Murders. If you take the trouble to
examine the, the way the words are put together, you'll find it totally
different. How it's like Mad Ronald, which is a sad story. The way that the
words go together are different from the way the words go together, and say, uh,
oh, I don't know what. No, I don't have any style. All I do is have a good,
that's a good judgment as to how to, as, as to the proper way of putting words
together, to generate the proper, uh,
not mood, not, uh, well, generate the proper style for that particular word
evolve. And, uh, to, uh, say that I have a style, don't even know you, not a
noise, but, uh, here, edit, edit that out. Okay. I'm not annoyed, I'm just, uh,
what I'm trying to say is that, uh, I don't think it looks very deep into, uh,
into what I'm doing. That, you can paraphrase that or do whatever you like with
it, I don't care. Or defeat it, it can go. I don't really care one way or the
other. Well, I didn't mean to imply that everything you wrote was a, a typical,
you know, the same, the same exact work, but what I, what it sort of meant was
that back in the, say in the late forties and early fifties, you were, I guess
you were writing for the pulp magazines. You know, there were no books. I was
learning my trade. Uh, I got started writing, uh, not, not real young, you know,
like some guys did. In fact, I was doing lots of other things. And then I
decided I was going to be a writer and I started writing and I had all the
talents for it, I guess, apparently. But I didn't have the, the knack or the
practice or whatever you want to call it of putting the words together. And then
I started writing. And also I was, I was, uh, trying to write the wrong kind of
story. In those days, the gadget story was very big. And, uh, I waste a lot of
time trying to write gadget stories or scientific breakthroughs and things like
that, which is, uh, essentially kind of a, uh, blind alley, I think. And, uh,
it's a phase of the field which is mercifully going over the hill. I've got a
very good scientific background. It's not that I don't know science. I do know.
I, uh, I, uh, was going to be a physicist, actually, for a while. I started to
become a physicist, but I changed my mind. And, uh, so it's, uh, it's, uh, uh,
in the 40s and 50s, I was writing and experimenting, collecting rejection slips.
And there was an apprentice period, uh, an apprentice period in which, um,
I was paid not very much for, but, uh, you know, check once in a while. But,
essentially, those 40 and 50 stories, they're not, they're not much good.
They're not worth. Uh, I just soon forget them.
That's the way it goes. How about you? You a writer? I'm an English teacher. I
do some writing, but I, uh, I teach English here at Odessa College. Uh-huh. So I
guess I'm more scholar than I am a writer. But you'll understand what I'm
saying. Oh, yes, sir, I do. Yes, very well. Um, I understand you did sell some
stories to, to Campbell. Oh, yeah, I sold to Campbell. Um, I, uh,
in those days, Campbell was, uh, the best market, paid the most money. And I was
always happy to sell to Campbell, but I was never one of Campbell's coterie
group, whatever it was called, or was on the outside, which now, I'm very well
suited.
I, as I say, I think it was a blind alley. Campbell was, in many ways, a, um, an
interesting man. He had great, uh, but I don't think he's taste the literature
was all that sound. You know, he, uh, was a positive force, dynamic force for
the time. Uh, but in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in In, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in
In,
in, in, in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in, in
In, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in,
in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in,
in, in, in I thought I'd be a mining engineer. I gave that up. And, uh,
intensively decided, no, I'm going to be a writer. And, uh, why I chose science
fiction, I don't know. Or fantasy, whatever you want to call it. I, when I was a
kid, I'd done a lot of reading. Well, I'd done a lot of reading and everything.
I'd done a lot of reading and I'd done a lot of reading and everything. But, uh,
the, uh, I think I probably more touched by, or, not influenced, just a word,
or, influenced, I guess you might say, by, uh, the fantasy and the, uh, so
-called science fiction, rather than by much anything else. Although I, I
wouldn't have, I would have loved to be able to write like, uh, Wodos, T.G.
Wodos. That would have been great. But, it's obvious, there could only be one,
one life that he can't have several. And, uh, so that particular niche was
blocked, so I guess that's kind of these, uh, fantasy writers. I, I could have
written, I, I wrote Murder Mysteries. I had, uh, decent success with them. I've
never tried what is so-called mainstream novel. Whatever that means, I don't
know. But, uh, uh, it's never had a slight interest for me to write a, uh, a
book in the field, which, I guess, appealed to the, uh, oh, the thousand, uh,
you know, there is, uh, the, uh, valley of the dollars, or something like that.
I wouldn't know how to start. I guess I could do it. But, uh,
I like to write the things I like. The size of it is I write the things I want
to write or like to write. And these things are the ones I like to write. And,
uh, that is the story of the why I'm seeing a science fiction fantasy writer.
Just basic self-indulgence. And that's what you want.
You there? Yes, sir. That's fine. Yeah. I don't know if you're listening or
whether you're not there or not. No, I'm just being careful about butting in,
because if I should butt into one of your speeches, then it's hard to edit me
out. Oh, I... I just want to make sure that you're done before I start. But I'm
listening. Okay. Yeah. Um... Yeah, there's a few people listening here. Um, I
have been following you ever since I started reading science fiction. Now, you,
you know, you are my favorite author, and I think I've read everything you've
written, as far as I know. I have always thought personally, I'm sure you've
heard this from other people, that you have lacked recognition. Um, you know,
you're contemporary with people like Asimov and Heinlein and Van Vogt and
Sturgeon, but perhaps not as well known as, you know, as they are. And I
wondered why you thought that was, because your science fiction is at least as
good, if not better, than theirs. Well, it's something I wouldn't want to
comment about. Okay. That's, that's good. Um... Um... Norman Spinrad wrote an
essay on your Dragon Masters, I think, in review of it. And he said that, um...
That you were more for a minority taste of reader, rather than the mass market.
Uh, I wasn't quite sure what he meant by that. Do you, have you... I don't quite
agree with him. I don't... I don't think I write anything that's particularly,
uh, obscure, or pedantic, or, uh...
Very highly cultivated. You know, it seems like everything I write is, uh,
fairly universal.
Don't you think so yourself? Doesn't you think like it's narrow-based? I mean...
No, it's not narrow. No, I don't think it is, either. But on the other hand... I
don't really think it is. On the other hand, I'm always amazed at the people who
consider themselves science fiction readers who have read very little of what
you've written, too. Yeah, well, I don't really know much, huh? Well, it's,
uh... I've long ago given... Stop worrying about it. I just sit at this end of
the tube, and occasionally drop the manuscript down, and then forget it. I hope
that I'll get paid for it. But, uh... If I start worrying about pleading people,
or... Or worrying about who the readership was, I think I'd probably go mad, or
madder. Uh... It's, uh, pointless, I think, to... I've almost... I think the
size of this, I've always written the things which amuse me, correct. And, uh...
The, uh... I think another thing, too, that, uh... I've developed rather
gradually and... Uh... Reached my presence, whatever you want to call it, by a
kind of back way, inconspicuously. Uh... I've never... Clark is known for 2001.
Uh... Heightline, Stranger in a Strange Land, or whatever, children's books, or
through, uh...
And... It's, uh...
I've never... I've never been associated with anything that has any other
publicity attached to me. So, uh... I just seem to... Um... Arrive on the scene.
So it seems to me, if I were looking at my own career in this way, you know,
kind of... Quietly from... from, uh... Northeast somewhere. Rather than, uh...
Through... Through having... A... A movie, or... Or something of sort. Okay.
That's my explanation, anyway. Uh... Right now, I'm, uh... Doing a, uh... In
fact, I'm just finishing up on a rather... Something totally different. It's a,
uh... Medieval-type fantasy. It's very long. I'm just going over 600 pages on it
now. And it's just possible that this will have... More... Acceptance across a
wider... Spectrum of readers than, uh... My other stuff. Although, as... I said
at... The beginning of this sentence here that I... I... I really don't
understand myself why... Um... Why, uh... Why I don't, uh... Attract a larger
audience. It puzzles me a little. If I was doing something real... Strange or
writing like... James Joyce, you know... Or something like to understand it.
But, uh... I write simple sentences. Subject matter is, uh... Not all that...
Uh... Hard to...
Um... Understand, so... But then... Actually, uh... I forget your name. I'm
sorry. Darryl. Bill? Darryl. Yeah. Okay.
I don't like the way they sound. Yeah, that's fine. You know, for about two,
three minutes... Mm-hmm. I'm stumbling around talking about... Why I don't
understand, uh... Um... What people don't like, and it sounds like I'm... Kind
of whining. Yeah, no, I'll leave that out. I do. Leave that out. That doesn't...
That's not what I'm trying to say anyway. Um... Yeah, all right. What's your
next question? Okay, I want to get back to your work, just to move along. Um...
I guess your first book that was published as a book was The Dying Earth around
1950. Um... It was. Now that was different... It was. ...than the pulp material.
Yeah. Uh... What caused that kind of change? Well... The funny thing about it,
is that was written before I started selling. That was written at C. It was
Merchant C. And I didn't... Had quite a bit of a spare time, and I began writing
these, uh...
Um... Flamboyant, highly colored stories.
And, uh... Then, when I began telling, I think I had these things lying around.
And, uh... I kind of forget, to tell you the truth, just what happened to them.
But I think... I had them sitting around for, oh, several years. And finally,
put them in the... Put them together in the... The way they are now. And, uh...
I sent them to the agent, and he sold them to Hillman periodically. But those
were written... All very, very early. They were written, uh... Before I even
started selling them. So they're... Just representative of... Uh... Kind of...
Rather early... Early... Stage. And then, when I started writing this so-called
gadget fiction, or... Or other stuff, I changed... The style of this... The
Dying Earth stuff wasn't at all suitable for... Writing... The stuff I began
selling. The stuff I was selling was any good, because it wasn't. But, uh... But
at least the style of The Dying Earth would have been absolutely, uh...
Let's do it, uh... Incongruous. Wouldn't have fitted, so I used different
styles. Uh... You didn't sell the stories individually, did you? In other words,
it... No, I, uh... No, I didn't. I was just trying to think about that. But I
don't believe I sold them anywhere. It seems to me... Uh... I may be wrong...
Because it's so long ago, but it seems to me that, uh... The first time I ever
sold them was, uh... In the group. I'm almost certain, but I wouldn't swear to
them. In other words, the order is your own order in the book. Yeah, I used that
order... I turned around the... The temporal sequence a little bit. But I did
that... In order for... What I consider to be a little bit more impactful.
The, uh... Well... Rightly or wrongly, I like it, but better the way it is... If
they were in the exact chronological sequence. Did you mean for there to be sort
of a movement or progression like it... The, the... No, there were, uh... They
were conceived of as being vaguely interrelated stories, But without, uh...
Uh... Uh... Connecting, uh... Strong connecting links. In fact, the last one was
written without any connecting link, whatever. It was just, uh... Conceived.
Different. And I think it is a little bit... Uh... A little different from,
uh... Well, I thought that, for instance, that last story, the first part of the
book was very heavily into the magic, And the last part, the last couple of
stories were more science fiction. Whatever you want to call it, yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
Then I guess it was about, for about 15 years, you didn't write any dying earth
material until you came to the, uh... The Eyes of the Overworld series. That's
not my title. I like so many of those stories. I know, what was your title? Did
you have one? I think I just called it Cool. Yeah. Uh... Why did you come back
to the Dying Earth? Did you get reader response? No. It's that I don't... I just
always wanted to do some more stuff in there. Uh... And the encounter
was, uh... swarming around in my head. And I just decided that, uh... It'd be
kind of fun to do some Kugel stories. In fact, as soon as I finish, I want to
get another volume going, but... I have time to do it after I finish what I'm
doing now. I've got two stories in a second, instead of Kugel. I made another
Kugel book. I'd like to... I'd like to get another three, four stories to make
another book out of it. Good. Okay, let me move on again. Um... I don't know of
any other writer who was as convincing as you are in constructing a... an alien
planet with its cultures and customs and so forth. Uh... Uh... I think she used
the word xenographer in science fiction. My question would be, when you start a
novel about a world, say, Durdane or Trie or something, where do you begin? Do
you begin with a story and then build a world, or begin with the world and get a
story or a character or...? Well, this is such a complicated process that I...
I'm not even going to answer it. It's, uh... It's part of... It's part of...
Everything, you know. It all works together. It's just like, uh... Oh... I'm
trying to think of an analogy, I can't think of that. But it's just like if
you're an architect... And you're building a house, do you put down the
foundations first? Or do you think of the people, how they're going to live? Or
do you envision the landscape? In other words, you do it all together. You know,
it all kind of forms off your head. That's vanity. And you see it, and... That's
it. There it is. Does that make sense? Yeah, it does. Uh, you don't really... I
guess you wouldn't appreciate or be able to respond to a source kind of a
question for a story, would you? No, I don't have any sources. But if you ask
the question, I'll tell you. The question is, uh... If I have a simple answer, I
can tell you. If you have a question? Well, okay. I mean, I could get, you know,
small or big on this. For instance, in the novel Trollian from the Elastor
Cluster series, that game Hussaid, or Hussaid? I call it Hussaid. Hussaid?
Hussaid. Hussaid. Oh, good, okay. Hussaid is Noah, just not made it up. Okay.
Um... What about some of the medieval settings in some of your books? Like in,
say, Inferior, the guild system there? Oh, I don't know.
Um... Guilds. Well, it's just that, uh... It seems that that would be a
universal pattern. I don't think it's medieval. I think, uh... Guilds are, uh...
Clans.
Kingdoms.
Brotherhoods. Over, uh... When you have lots of different societies, I think
these things will all... All form under many, under different, uh... Guises,
perhaps, but...
Uh... There's only so many ways that human beings can, uh... Join together. One
is through their occupation. One is through their blood relationship. One is
maybe, uh... Political beliefs. There's only ten or twelve different ways.
Whereas, uh... Societies and, uh... Cultures are infinite. So, uh... If there
weren't... Guilds. Here and there in the future, One would be rather surprised.
OK. You've mentioned, and I knew beforehand, That you do have a science
background. Uh... In... Most of your books, uh... You set up societies that,
um... That are really non-technological. You know, like, people work with their
hands, and so forth. Even though... Even though man has star drive, and space
travel, and so forth. I wondered why you didn't spend more time on the
scientific... It's hard. It's just like when you're writing magic stories, where
the magic is in here. It's... If you have a... A magician... To live with him in
such a way that he can't do anything, And then there's no story. When you're
writing about a... Magic and a magician, You have to have it arranged, So that
there's some kind of a... Conflict or a tension involved. So the same thing, in
exactly the same phrases, Could be said about science. Uh... If you have...
Scientists... Who are able to manipulate energy, And uh... Robots, Horses, and
tools... There's no... They can do anything without leaving their armchair. Then
there's no story. Uh... Stories are made by... Human beings... Interacting and
doing things with their hands. Not by, uh... Turning laser beams on each other.
Or... Or... Even worse... Sitting at consoles and pressing buttons. That's no
fun. Or... No story involved. Let's... Read about that. No, that's... No,
that's... It's... It's...
It's... Right, that's an excellent answer. I... That's... That's good. Very
good. I thought it might have been also some sort of a... Oh, I don't know, a
liking for a simpler, more primitive existence. You know, a dislike of a plastic
technology. Uh... A little bit, perhaps, but, uh... Uh... I... I... I... I tend
to, uh, be a little suspicious of people that... live their life only in terms
of abstractions.
Uh... That, uh... In other words, I have more... What's the word? I have
admiration, more respect, more... A little feeling, I think, for people that...
Live their lives a little closer to the soil. You know, that they're farmers,
or... Uh... Seemen, or... People that are, uh... In contact with natural things.
Uh... People that, uh... Work in... Computer factories, or something like that.
I suppose they're... Maybe when they leave work, they go out and... Uh... Raise
a garden, or something. And... Re-establish their... Contact with the soil, but,
uh... Uh... Uh... Hey, uh... Uh... Cut that, less. This... I'm getting too
involved here. Uh... Let's go back a little way. Just say that, uh... I just
feel... Cut it off where I said that I just feel a little more... Sympathy with
the people that have, uh... Contact with the, uh... I'm getting too... Uh...
Complicated, you know. If I go around analyzing people's, uh... Occupations, and
say whether this is... More abstract than that, or... It just makes a lot of...
It gets too complicated. It gets too complicated. OK, I understand. Fine. Yeah.
Yeah. OK, let me just ask you a question on the, uh... Is it pronounced Chi, the
planet Chi? I usually say Chi. Chi. It makes no difference. I'm not sensitive
about such things. OK, uh... It seemed to me that of all the series you've done,
that was... I mean... Yeah, OK, that might have been the one that had sort of an
open ending that you could add to it. Do you plan anything further on Adam Rees?
I, uh... I thought about it at the time. But, uh... I don't think I'd want to go
back there. I think it was better left the way it is. Uh... The... Obvious...
Set of sequels would be... Expeditions from Earth. Or, not Earth, but the...
Whatever was the system then. Landing on there and getting embroiled in the,
uh... In the people there. And, uh... I toyed with the idea a little bit and
then I decided, no. That would become baffles. So that would be... You know, I
didn't decide it wouldn't work. I thought, just leave it alone. The way it was
is great. Everybody left and, uh... Uh... I didn't want to disturb it. I wanted
something else. You know, I think, uh... Okay, um... In a number of your books,
I'm thinking of the, uh... Durdane trilogy, principally. But in a number of
them, you speak of the historical institute. And I have a vague idea of what
that is. But... Could you sort of fill in some details on what that is? Your
idea of what it is, it's just exactly as careful and elaborate as mine is. You
know, as much fun as I do. But, uh... This is about the size of it. I just left
it kind of vague, I just didn't want to go into it too much. Okay. If I ever had
any reason to, I probably would have, uh... Fleshed it out a little bit. But...
Just for the purposes of that book and other occasions where I've used it, I've
just left it a... Just a kind of a force off the distance. And, uh... Let that
suffice. Uh... That's the reason for that. In other words... I just don't
know... I've never... I've never worked it up in any... Compreh... Not
comprehension, but... Exact or... Precise form. Okay. And the, uh... The Elastro
Cluster series, uh... That almost allows for an infinite number of books. Do you
have any further planned in that series? It's a matter of time. I'd, uh... As I
say, I want to do a kuhu. If the thing I'm working on now goes... I've got two
or three more in mind. Now, these are kind of long books. They're, uh... They're
not sword and sorcery. If anybody's called it sword and sorcery, I'd... I'd...
I'd have a fifth. It's, uh... But it is medieval. There are swords in it, there
is sorcery, but it's, uh... No big... Uh... Muscle-bound people wearing
jockstraps. Cutting people's heads off. It's, uh... But anyway, if, uh... If
this goes over, and I hope it will, I'll do some more in the series. If not, I
just don't know what else to do. Mm-hmm. I'll have to figure it out if I go
wrong. Okay, I'm moving right along here. Uh... I've always noted a lack of,
uh... A lack of didacticism in your writing. Sort of a... A detached, ironic
perspective on... On people and the human condition, but... Sometimes I see some
pretty sharp satire, criticism. And usually that's directed against, uh... Say,
an elite class, or a ruling class. Would that be a fair observation on my part?
No, not necessarily. Uh... Those, um... Criticisms... Which you may see,
generally...
Um... They're... I, uh... Well, I don't know. It would be complicated to try to
explain to you my personal ideology, but, uh... In other words, I think your
observation is a little bit off the mark there. I, I do have, uh... Opinions,
obviously.
Um... But, in general, I try to keep ideology Out of the books except By...
Remote inference. Although, I have in two books I got a little bit of ideology
in there. And... I don't think I'll... I won't do it again, I don't think. Would
one of those be The Grey Prince? Right. Okay. The Grey Prince, and... The
other... I've been accused of it, is... You know, in the Alistar. Right. But,
uh... I didn't mean any particular... It was satire, rather than, uh...
Ideology, I think. The welfare state wasn't bad, you know, so to speak. But,
uh... Maybe it was laid off a little bit too heavy hands. Have you ever had
that... Said to you, or spoken to you, in terms of The Last Castle? The society
you depict there is sort of a brittle, decadent kind of society. Never was. No,
there's, uh... Never any complaints there at all. I wasn't thinking of
complaints, you certainly have a right to your opinions, and you have a right to
put them in your books. Yeah. But generally, uh, speaking, uh... I, I like to
keep my opinions... So that nobody even knows... You're there. That they only
work out through the way things happen. And if anybody notices, then I feel I
haven't done it very skillfully. Where, uh, however the Great Prince, it was,
uh... A little bit more overt. A little trifle. But, still, it wasn't all that.
You know, it wasn't... Uh-huh. I don't want to bring anybody over the head, you
know. I don't think. Okay, let me just shoot out a couple miscellaneous
questions here. Uh... Do you have any works that you're particularly satisfied
with? That you... I don't know what word to use, not favorite so much, but that
you're particularly pleased with? The way they came out. Well, I always like
Google. He's, uh... I'm very happy with that, generally speaking.
Um... I like the Durdane set pretty well. Well... Well, let me think. Uh... I
generally like most everything I've done over the last... 20 years or so. In
fact, I... I look back at some of the stuff and I... I... It scares me, you
know. I just hope that I can, uh... Keep on... writing up to the level of that
stuff that I did earlier. So I... try harder, you know. Just so I... I can kind
of, uh... Not feel that I'm over the hill or anything like that. Strike that
last off. Okay. Off, uh... Just go back. Just, uh... What's been your biggest
moneymaker in the science fiction fantasy field? Well, what I was... I don't
know for sure, but I can tell you something that always amused me. When I was
first starting, I, uh... As I mentioned to you, I was trying to decide how to go
about making some money in the business. And, uh... I thought I'd try to be one
of these guys that writes very, very fast. You know, just sit down and put paper
in the typewriter. I write longhand, by the way. But, uh... So one day, I went
down. Over the weekend, I was visiting some people. Over the weekend, I wrote
two short stories. This first draft. And, uh... Oh, I... I forget now. Well, I
guess my wife typed them. And I said to Mom, both were sold. And they were the
two first Magnus Reidolf stories. And they appeared, in due course. And, uh...
They were rotten stories. Both of them. They were just terrible. First draft.
Uh... Stories I just as soon see absolutely forgotten. Well, I don't know why or
how, but a producer in The 20th Century Fox noticed this story was called Hard
Luck Diggies, I guess. Rotten stories. But there was just a sentence there that
caught his mind. So he picked up this story and paid me for it. Well, you know,
Hollywood style. Hired me to come down there to prepare treatment of things for
a movie. It paid me well to, uh... you know, to do this play for it, screenplay.
Now that wretched story that I'd done in whatever...
It made an awful lot of money. And, uh... Yet it was probably one of the worst
things I've ever done.
Um... And, by the tenths. You know, or... How's that worked outside of... By the
words. In other words, whether it made so many words, uh... So many cents a
word, or... So much dollars, or... Thousands of dollars a word, whatever. And,
uh... But over the years, what with, uh... Foreign sales and resales, The...
This scheme became meaningless because... The, uh... Going to inflation and the
way money changed, I'd be getting paid five times as much for... Hello? Yeah,
I'm here. Yeah. I'd be getting paid five times as much for a sale of this story
to... France that I got originally. And it just was meaningless, so I just
stopped keeping... Keeping any account of these things. If, if you ask me, I...
I couldn't tell you. I have no idea. And I don't particularly care. Doesn't make
that much difference.